---
layout: post
title: Linear regression&#58 Using maximum likelihood to estimate the mean and standard deviation of a normally distributed random variable
category: blog
---

When a regression model is fit to data in `R`, there can be a lot of math that occurs 'behind the scenes' between when the regression is executed and what `R` formats and returns. Doing so is generally useful as it does not require a person to code common statistical algorithms on their own. However, the math that is hidden away is really interesting and could help statistical practitioners better understand the models they use. This set of posts breaks down a bit of that math that may occur when conducting regression analysis. Starting here, I will discuss how to use maximum likelihood to estimate the mean and standard deviation of a normal distribution. This would be akin to fitting an intercept only linear regression to some data (e.g., `lm(my_data ~ 1)`).

### Motivating example

We are interested in the average weight (in grams) of eastern gray squirrels (*Sciurus carolinensis*) at [Humboldt park](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Humboldt_Park_(Chicago_park)) in Chicago, Illinois and how much the weight of squirrels deviate from this central tendency. With these data in hand we also want to know how likely a squirrel in Humboldt Park weighs at least 750 grams.

After procuring the necessary permits and a conducting a few days of field work, we collected the weight of 10 squirrels. Further, we know that these 10 squirrels do no represent the entire Humboldt park population because many other squirrels were not able to weighed (i.e., the were not captured). In other words, these squirrels represent a sample of the overall population.

Mathematically, we will represent the squirrel weight data as the vector <span>$$\mathbf{y}$$</span>. This vector has a length of 10 and each element represents the weight of a squirrel. In `R`, this data vector can be represented as:
```R
# The squirrel weight data
y <- c(557.1, 416.3, 393.6, 459.0, 588.6, 503.5, 507.7, 649.3, 529.2, 524.2)
```


test 
For the sake of this example we will assume that these weights are a random sample drawn from a normally distributed population such that: 

$$y_i \sim Normal(\mu, \sigma^2).$$

Here, <span>$$\mu$$</span> and <span>$$\sigma^2$$</span> respectively represent the population mean and variance of squirrel's weight at Humboldt park. 

We would like to generate point estimates of these two quantities.

### Estimating this in `R`

 For this example, let  <span>$$\mathbf{y} =[557.1, 416.3, 393.6, 459.0, 588.6, 503.5, 507.7, 649.3, 529.2, 524.2]$$ </span>.



Let's say we have four numbers in the vector <span>$$\mathbf{y}$$</span> and we want to know how likely some 5th value is given these four data points. For example, let <span>$$\mathbf{y} =[7, 8, 3, 8]$$ </span>. We want to know how likely the value <span>$$10$$ </span>. One way to do this is with the normal distribution. 

 Assuming that these data arise from a normal distribution (i.e., `\(\mathbf{y} ~ Normal(\mu, \sigma^2 \)`, how do we determine what the most likely values are for the mean and standard deviation?


With these data we would like to estimate the most likely values for the mean and standard deviation 
This is a big old test

$$ \phi(x,y)$$

Follow it up with some `\(inline math 2+2 \)`
